A tropical cyclone is an area of low pressure which develops over tropical or subtropical waters.As most cyclones are formed in the tropical seas and as the density of population is greatest in the tropical regions, cyclones constitute a major hazard for a large number of people around the world, these cyclones have each caused a large number of fatality and immense damage in property. Frequent attacks of less intensive cyclones continue to cause human casualties and considerable economic damage in tropical countries.The present idea focuses on automating the forecasting of cyclone track and thereby providing a more reliable basis for early warning systems.The technique will use artificial neural networks to interpret satellite images. A multi-layered neural network, resembling the human visual system, will be trained to forecast the movement direction of cyclones based on satellite images.  
Cloud patterns surrounding the cyclone is a good indicator of the direction of cyclone movement. A cyclone’s track is indicated by the shape, and relative position of surrounding cumulonimbus clouds. What is more, these features are visible in satellite images. Detecting and categorizing these features using a neural network would therefore provide valuable input to automated cyclone forecasting. The idea is that neural networks can learn to detect the surrounding clouds that are present in the satellite image and learn to recognize how these clouds are positioned relative to the cyclone center.The task for the neural network in the present study is to recognize the elongated shape present in the image, irrespective of random variations in size and position of this shape. 
Architecture of our artificial neural network  
Robust pattern recognition can be achieved through stepwise processing in a bi-directionally connected multi-layer network. At the first processing level, shape recognition is based on detection and integration of characteristic constituent features, such as small cloud segments. The constituent features are smaller in size than the aggregate shape, and therefore can be detected by looking at limited parts of the image. The stepwise integration of features that we have implemented in our artificial neural network resembles the part of the human visual system which is responsible for pattern detection and shape recognition.By processing the image through a matrix of feature detector units, constituent features in different parts of the image can be extracted in parallel. For each feature that is detected, the network needs to abstract away from minor variations in position and size, but only within a small part of the image. Due to the task requirements, rotational variations are encoded as meaningful features at each stage of processing. At subsequent stages of processing, the simpler constituent features are integrated into larger patterns that is, into more complex features. Recognition of these secondary features is based on the combined activation of feature detectors at the previous stage, and is thus not strictly dependent on which part of the image these activations has arisen from. For each additional transformational step, the more independency is achieved and the more complex patterns can be recognized. At the final stages of processing, the constituent features can be integrated into an overall shape which is perceived to be rotated in a specific way. This information is then mapped onto a directional indicator showing the predicted movement of the cyclone.
